Welcome.
I'm Bob Sedgwick, professor of
computer science at Princeton.
This is our online course,
Algorithms, developed by myself and
Kevin Wayne here at Princeton.
We're going to start with an overview,
a discussion of why you might want to
study algorithms, and then a little bit of
discussion about the resources
that you need to take this course.
So what is this course?
It's an intermediate level
survey course on algorithms.
We're going to concentrate
on programming and
problem solving in the context
of real applications.
And our focus is going to be on two
things, algorithms which are methods for
solving problems, and data structures
which store the information
associated with the problem and
go hands and hands with algorithms.
[COUGH] These are the basic topics
that we'll cover in part one and
part two of the course.
The first part is data types sorting and
searching.
We'll consider a number of data
structures and algorithms that are basic
to all the methods we consider including
stacks, queues, bags, and priority queues.
Then, we'll consider classic algorithms
for sorting, putting things in order.
That's quick sort, merge sort,
heap sort, and radix sorts.
And we'll consider classic methods for
searching, including binary search trees,
red-black binary search trees,
and hash tables.
The second part of the course is for
more advanced algorithms,
including graph algorithms,
classic graph searching algorithms,
minimum spanning tree and
shortest-paths algorithms.
Algorithms for processing strings
including regular expressions and
data compression.
And then, some advanced algorithms that
make use of the basic algorithms that
we developed earlier in the course.
So why should one study algorithms?
Well, their impact is very broad and
far reaching.
From the Internet to biology,
to commercial computing, to computer
graphics, security, multimedia, social
networks and scientific applications.
Algorithms are all around us.
They're use for movies and video games,
for particle collision simulation.
They're used to study the genome and
all manner of other applications.
So that's one important reason to study
algorithms, there impact is broad and
far reaching.
Algorithms are also interesting to
study because they have ancient roots.
Now, the first algorithm we study goes
back to 300 BC dating at least to Euclid.
The concept of an algorithm
was formalized,
actually here at Princeton by Church and
Turing in the 1930s, but
most algorithms that we consider
were discovered in recent decades.
In fact, some were discovered by
undergraduates in a course like this.
And there's plenty of other algorithms
waiting to be discovered by students
like you.
The main reason that people study
algorithms is to be able to solve problems
that could not otherwise be addressed.
For example,
in the first lecture, we're going to talk
about the network connectivity problem.
Where the problem is given a large
set of items that are connected
together pair wise.
Is there a way to get from one to another
with a path through the connection.
As you can see from this example, it's not
clear whether or not there's such a path.
We need a computer program to do it.
In fact,
we need an efficient algorithm to do it.
In this case,
the answer is that there is such a path.
Another reason to study algorithms is for
intellectual stimulation.
Algorithms are very
interesting object to study.
Don Knuth, who wrote several books on
algorithms and was a pioneer in the field,
said that,
an algorithm must be seen to be believed.
You can't just think about an algorithm,
you have to work with it.
Another quote from Francis Sullivan says,
that great algorithms
are the poetry of computation.
Just like verse, they can be terse,
allusive, dense and even mysterious.
But once unlocked they cast a brilliant
new light on some aspect of computing.
Algorithms are interesting for
intellectual stimulation.
Another reason many people
study algorithms and
I suspect many of you is it's necessary
to understand good algorithms,
efficient algorithms and data structures
in order to be a proficient programmer.
Linus Torvalds who created Linux says
that the difference between a bad
programmer and a good one is
whether he considers his code or
his data structures more important.
Bad programmers worry about the code.
Good programmers worry about data
structures and their relationships.
And I might add the algorithms
to process them.
Niklaus Wirth,
another pioneer in computer science,
wrote a famous book called Algorithms
+ Data Structures = Programs.
[COUGH] Another reason,
nowadays, to study algorithms,
is that they have become a common
language for understanding nature,
algorithms are computational models and
algorithmic models
are replacing mathematical models and
scientific inquiry.
In the 20th century,
scientist developed mathematical models to
try to understand natural phenomenon,
it soon
became clear that those mathematical
models were difficult to solve.
It was difficult to create solutions
to be able to test hypotheses
against natural phenomena.
So more and more and more, nowadays,
people are developing computational
models, where they attempt to
simulate what might be happening in nature
in order to try to better understand it.
Algorithms play an extremely
important role this process and
we'll see some of these in this course.
Another important reason is that,
if you known how to effectively
use algorithms and data structures,
you're going to have a much
better chance at interviewing for
a job in the technology
industry than if you don't.
Here's a bunch of reasons that I just
went through for studying algorithms.
Their impact's broad and far reaching.
They have old roots and
present new opportunities.
That allow us to solve problems that
could not otherwise be addressed.
You can use them for
intellectual stimulation to
become a proficient programmer.
They might unlock the secrets of life
in the universe and they're good for
fun and profit.
In fact, a programmer might ask,
why study anything else?
Well, there's plenty of good
reasons to study other things, but
I'll submit there's no good
reason not to study algorithms.
[COUGH] So for this course we have two
resources that I want to talk about and
make sure that people are familiar
with before entering into the content.
This is a publishing model that Kevin
Wayne, and I developed and
have been using for many years.
And we think it's a very effective
way to support the kinds of
lectures that we're going to
be giving in this course.
Down at the bottom and it's optional for
this course, we have a textbook, it's
a traditional textbook that extensively
covers the topics in the course.
In fact, many more topics then
we can present in lecture.
And then,
supporting that textbook is free,
online material that
we call the book site.
You can go to the book site
to see the lecture slides.
But more important,
there's code, there's exercises,
there's a great deal of information there.
In fact, maybe ten times, what's in the
book, including a summary of the content.
So during this course you'll
be referring to the book site
frequently while working online.
People often ask about prerequisites.
We're assuming that people who take
this course know how to program,
know the basics of loops,
arrays, functions.
They have some exposure to object
oriented programming and recursion.
We use the Java language, but
we don't dwell on details of Java.
We mostly use it as
an expository language.
We do some Math but not advanced Math.
If you want to review the material that
we think is prerequisite to the material
in this course, you can do a quick
review by looking at sections 1.1 and
1.2 of the book, either at
the book site or in the textbook.
If you want an in depth review
we have a full textbook
called an introduction to programming
in Java, an interdisciplinary approach.
There's a booksite and a textbook as well.
But the bottom line is you
should be able to program and
the quick exercise to get ready use to
write a Java program on your computer
perhaps using our programming
model as described on the bookside.
We'll provide much more
detailed information on that
as we get into assignments.
You can use your own programming
environment if you're comfortable with
one, or you can download ours.
We have instructions on
the web about how to do that.